"Dimension Doors"
Campaign Workbook -- The Journey
Dungeon February 2006

Where do the PCs go when they are sent to a randomly determined plane? Then a planar mishap occurs, consult the following options, each a springboard for interplanar adventure. When the PCs step into that <i>gate</i> they might arrive in any of the following locations.

1. In the middle of an elven couple's romantic picnic outing in a lush field on Arborea.
2. Dumped on stage in the middle of an acrobatics performace by a troupe of magmin in the sultan's own Sulfur Theatre in the City of Brass on the Elemental Plane of Fire.
3. Atop a colossal floating metal cube hurtling through space on Archeron seconds from collision with another cube.
4. Among a caravan of shackled petitioners traveling through an acidic snowstorm on Gehennna.
5. Dropped in a river of thick mud and sucking silt on the Elemental Plane of Earth.
6. Inside a council chaber in the City of Glass during a secret alliance meeting between kuo-toas, sahuagin, and lizardfolk on the Elemental Plane of Water.
7. In the dark joyless cell of an insane pit fiend held captive on Carceri, who madly plans his conquest of the Nine Hells. The fiend claims he knew the PCs would arrive and attempts to use them in his crazed plan.
8. Inside a twisting jagged tunnel connnecting the Elemental Plane of Air and Pandemonium.
9. Surrounded by gorgeous and hungry erinyes in the quarters of a powerful devil's harem in the Third Circle of Hell.
10. Atop a rapudly melting iceberg now floating in the RIver Styx in the 113th layer of the Abyss, surrounded by the river's noxious water.
11. On the deck of a flying ship owned by a mad cartographer obsessed with charting the Ever-Changing Chaos of Limbo.
12. On Kord's throne in the Hall of the Valiant on Ysgard.
13. FLoating in a current on the Positive Energy Plane near an archmage that is enjoying the plane's enhancing effect on his magic by unleashing devastatingly powerful spells in all directions just for the fun of it.
14. On Mechanus where a group of demons is engaged in an act of sabotage, damaging a lynchpin that connects several gears.
15. Next in line at an arm wrestiling contest between orcs and goblins on Acheron.
16. In aspecial forge on the Elemental Plane of Fire where a legendary azer smith channels the unearthly heat of the plane to forge his peerless blades.
17. Right next to an enormous veign of pure gold on the rocky slopes of Bytopia.
18. In the simple hovel of a fiendish goblin cobbler in the First Circle of Hell.
19. On the Plane of Mirrors looking out a mirror portal onto a distant scene of a friend, family member, or lover engaged in some uncharacteristic act of betrayal or evil.
20. At a wild bacchae party on the Olympian Glades of Arborea.
21. In an open field beneath a brilliant canopy of stars on Arcadia moments before night instantly becomes day with the sun shining overhead.
22. At the gate of the Crawling City of Gehenna as it scuttles forward, crushing anyone caught in its path.
23. Atop an enormous tiered wedding cake at a nuptial ceremony for two angels on Celestia.
24. In the great hall of a mighty orc warlord on Acheron seconds after an assassination attempt on the warlord's life.
25. In a celestial roc's nest in the Beastlands.
26. In the finest vineyard of the Blessed Fields of Elysium during a wine tasting celebration among angels and other celestial guests.
27. WIthin an enormous clockwork tower on Mechanus from which inevitables monitor temporal disturbances throughout the universe. 
28. In a vast, splendid orchard of peaches on Arcadia where a group of unfortunate celestials are sentenced to an eternity of picking peaches to atone for various trasngresssions.
29. Within an encampment of yugoloths being trained by their ultrloth commander on the Bleak Eternity of Gehenna.
30. Deep in a kelp forest ruled by tritons seeking allies in a war against a powerful sea hag on the Elemental Plane of Water.
31. FLoating in the middle of an animating field on the Positive Energy Plane.
32. Near a train of celestial prisoners being transported to an undead-infested dungeon in the doldrums of the Negative Energy Plane.
33. Dragged in the wake of a fiendish kraken on the 88th layer of the Abyss.
34. In the Realm of Dreams, trapped in their archenemy's nightmares.
35. In a dense forest in the Beastlands where wild elves hunt a celestial dire boar for sport.
36. Amidst an airborne joust between djinn on the Elemental Plane of Air.
37. In the line of fire at an archery contest on the Heroic Domains of Ysgard.
38. On top of a frost giant ice carver's dinner table in Winter's Hall on Pandemonium.
39. In the gizzard of a fiendish purple worm in the Abyss.
40. In the middle of the training session of several githzerai monks in the courtyard of their floating monastery in Limbo.
41. On the Plane of Shadow in a version of the PC's own hometown, eerily deserted on this plane.
42. In a ruined floating castle haunted by the ghost of a mighty storm giant kiong on the Elemental Plane of Air.
43. In the middle of a giant chaotic battle between two warring goblin tribes and maug mercenaries on Acheron.
44. Deep in a lightless maze of razor sharp rocks, populated by half-earth elemental minotaurs on the Elemental Plane of Earth
45. In a hovering coliseum where sphinxes engage in riddle duels for sport on the Elemental Plane of Air.
46. Near a crag on the Gray Waste of Hades where a cabal of night hags compare larvae and share tales of terror they visited upon hapless sleeping victims this night.
47. In a cherry blossom tree forest on Arborea where a famed elven poet struggles over the final couplet of his latest work.
48. In the front of the market stall  of a fire mephit who peddles all manner of cookware on the Elemental Plane of Fire.
49. Amongst a crowd gathered to watch a parade of great heroes (complete with a marching band) on Ysgard.
50. Inside the armory of a floating githyanki fortress on the Astral Plane.