"Seneschals and Majordomos"
Campaign Workbook -- The Cast
Dungeon August 2005

A king doesn't entertain every duke or baron who visits his palace, the master of a thieves' guild doesn't pick pockets on the streets, and the high priest doesn't cast <i>cure light wounds</i> on every scraped devotee who enters her temple. Powerful figures keep subordinates and servants for such things. Enter the power before the throne, the seneschal, lieutenant, or majordomo.
Below you'll find several subordinates, secretaries, and auxillaries. While ome exist merely as gatekeepers between PCs and those truly in power, others manipulate their masters or hold power beyond their station. Before adventurers posess the prestige to burst unannounced into the royal bedchamber, one of these deputies or advisors might serve as their only access to the elite.

THE PROFESSIONAL
Powerful organizations or individuals manage many different affairs and keep vast reams of paperwork. No one with any amount of power would stoop to performing such a menial task as organizing and filing endless lists and forms. Such is the domain of the clerk.
Although they shouldn't appear too often, an occasional interlude with one of these gatekeepers provides an entertaining roleplaying opportunity and adds some depth to a campaign. Adventuring parties entering or leaving a country or city could face numerous questions pertaining to their business, or they might need to obtain a character for their party or a license to carry their weapons. Even if legal hassles such as these don't exist in a campaign world, PCs will eventually need to deal with at least one clerk or personal assistant before they gain an audience with a guild leader, powerful cleric, or regional lord.
The statistics presented here represent any sort of simple assistant or professional paper-pusher. While such professionals fill the ranks of most governmental and business organizations, groups with specific skills (like thieves' guilds and temples) most likely rely on low-ranking members to fulfill their bookkeeping and public needs. The upper echelon of business or government often consists of skilled lieutenants and majordomos that carry out the important business of their organization and possibly even speak in their master's stead.

THE NOBLE
The honorable Vidal de Cerna, second cousing to a lesser baron of one of the realm's father-flung holdings, bears the esteemed distinction of being thirtyfirst in the line of succession. As he waits (and secretly prays) for the series of catastrophes necessary to leave him ruler of the land, Vidal fills his days as head court clerk and seneschal of all royal arrangements. Cutting a superior figure with his pointed nose and goateed chin and flaunting the finest of seasonal fashions, Vidal ensures that only those worth the imperial family's royal time receive appointments in his gem-studded ledger. Used to the requests and demands of an endless line of ambadassors, archbishops, and advisors, all who seek royal audience must first prove their worthiness to Vidal. Street urchins, solicitors, adventurers, and other riff-raff need not apply. Vidal is loyal to his liege for the time being, but he constantly seeks support for his inevitable future rule.

THE MANIPULATOR
Known in a dozen cities by a dozen names, the woman who currently calls herself Siobhan is an expert at getting what she wants. A red-headed beauty with a body fit to inspire poetry, she uses both her silken tongue and physical charms to steal her way into the hearts of the land's wealthy and powerful. Although most see Siobhan as nothing more than a well-kept courtesan, this is only half the truth. In fact, her cunning words and devious mind frequently influence and often significantly enhance her companion's fortune. As such, the financial and political prosperity (or sometimes ruin) of many of the realm's elite stems directly from her subtle persuasion. However, each lover serves as merely a stepping-stone to this Machiavellian vixen, elevating her to opportunities and paramours of even greater power. 

THE PARAGON
A cunning schemer and masater manipulator in his own right, the mind flayer El'Viddenvelp offers his service to powerful creatures throughout the Underdark and beyond. Often taking the name Methil among non-illithids, he possesses a curiously immaculate reputation, serving with almost slavish devotion. Innately skilled at revealing treachery and mercilessly quashing plots against his master, El'Viddenvelp swiftly earns the trust and respect of even the most paranoid patron, and is treated extremely well in return. Having served a host of masters, from calculating drow matrons to coarse human crime lords, his advice and arrangements always improve his master's affairs. However, whether through happenstance or design, all of the illithid's previous employers have met with tragic fates, ever leaving El'Viddenvelp to seek new patrons and unsampled luxuries.