the_campaign_outline-plotting_the_campaign_part_5
"The Campaign Outline -- Plotting the Campaign (part 5)"
Dungeoncraft -- Mastering the Game
Dungeon August 2005

Now that we've got a foundation for the basic ideas to think about when planning and plotting a campaign, it might be helpful to provide an example of just how to create a campaign outline. This is a general idea of where you want the campaign to go. Even if you've decided to run a mostly player-driven campaign, you can still outline the direction it might go, after you've learned what the players (and their chracters are) interested in doing.

THE OVERVIEW
You've got some great ideas for a mystery. Long ago in your world's history, a powerful angelic entity was betrayed and slain. Drops of her blood, once it touched the earth, granted celestial life to the very stones as she fell. This life was unformed, and unfocused. It was found by humans who feared that it could be corrupted and turned to evil. Thus, they secreted it away, referring to it only as the Legacy. Eventually, they locked it away in a magical tower, and built a fortress around the tower. Meanwhile, a powerful demon named Vibanak sets plots in motion so that he will eventually one day get control of the Legacy.
Enter the Player Characters.
But that's the hard part. You've got a cool idea, an intersting backstory, and even a nifty plot with the demon trying to get the Legacy. But how do the PCs get involved? How do the ideas become a campaign? That's where the outline comes in.

DETERMING APPROPRIATE LEVELS
A common mistake new DMs make is thrusting the PCs into a big campaign plot when in fact they have neither the experience, the power, nor the reputations to really be a part of it--yet.
For example, a confrontation--even indirectly--with a powerful demon is too much for the start of a campaign. You decide that's more appropraite for about 15th-level or so. And even the Legacy shouldn't even come close to falling into the PC's hands right away. That's more an 8th- or 9th-level thing.
But you want to introduce the whole thing early on--right away, in fact. Which gives you the scope of the campaign, from beginning, to the middle, and to the climactic end.
The problem you foresee (and foreseeing potential problems well ahead of time is what this process is all about) is that the whole Legacy plotline won't fill every game session from 1st to 15th level. Not even close, in fact. You can always throw in spur-of-the-moment adventures, but the hole you see if bigger than just an adventure here or there.

THE SECOND STORYLINE
You decide to create a second plotline--a subpllot, if you will, although it will get tied up with the main plot at the end. Since the whole Legacy thing is cosmic and vasat, you decide to make the second plotline more down-to-earth. There's a local noble, you decide, who is interested in procuring much greater political power for himself. You call him Lord Crenshaw. He intends to accomplish this by assassinating the queen, but only after he marries her only daughter, thus making him the husband of the new queen.
Whit this plot, you've not started with a backstory, but with a final outcome ( a possible outcome). Again, obviously the PCs aren't going to be involved with the comings and goings of the queen and the princess, so you work backward from the final outcome. Lord Crenshaw has to win the hand of the princess, and so he devises a scheme that will ensure that outcome--he will put her life in jeopardy and then rescue her. To pull that off, he hires mercenaries who will attack the palace while he is there, but attacking the palace is a massive undertaking. The mercenaries will need training, funding, and finding he's got, but a good plan requires a detailed layout of the palace. He decides to have the mercenaries kidnap the royal architect to get such a layout.
Once again, enter the PCs

A BEGINNING IS A DELICATE THING
The first adventure in a campaign is the time when the group forges its bonds and gains some cohesion. You decide to start dramatically. The PCs, you mandate, are all from an isolated county within the kingdom, but have come to a larger city to seek their fortunes. No sooner do they arrive when they hear tell that a large band of orcs and goblins has been spotted on the way toward the remote region where their homes and families lie.
If they take this initial hook, they go off to see if there's anything they can do to help, and eventually discover that the band wasn't, in fact, on their way to raid villages. Instead, they stopped at an ancient, mysterious fortress and attacked it. This is the fortress of the secret order guarding the Legacy, of course. The defenders have already slain many of the attackers by the time the PCs arrive, but there's still plenty of foes for the PCs to fight. Meanwhile, the PCs get the chance to meet with the order members and learn a little bit about what's going on.
Here's where you decide that managing information flow to the PCs is vital. The PCs learn that the order guards something really powerful called the Legacy, but no more details than that. The order members come across as a little crazy (being a cloistered community with a singular goal spanning many, many generations can do that), so the PCs probably won't know how much to trust them. If the PCs interrogate an orc or goblin prisoner they can discover that the orcs believe the Legacy to be a terrible, evil power that will destroy the world. Apparently, a shaman of theirs long ago had a vision of this, and they have been looking for it ever since. The vision, of course, came from Vibanak as a part of his attempts to get at the Legacy, but no one knows that.
All of this sets up doubts in the players' minds about what's really going on. No matter what happens, the PCs have no chance of getting at the Legacy at this point. The inner tower is too well protected for them to breach, even if they go off and purchase <i>knock</i> or <i>dispel magic</i> scrolls. To make things more complex, if the PCs gather information or conduct research into ancient history, they find all kinds of conflicting theories or ideas about what the Legacy is--none of them correct. Ideally, the PCs are intrigued but flummoxed. This is a good time to throw in some hints that there are demons involved, though--subtle foreshadowing will make the players all the more intrigued. In any event, the orcs ideally all lie in defeat and the order--severely diminshed by both time and the recent attack--is safe. There's nothing more for them to do here, for now.

IN THE MEANTIME
Soon thereafter, you introduce the secondary plot. The royal architect disappears, and the PCs go after the reward for his safe return. They eventually rescue him, but while they deal with the abductors, the grateful architect assures them that there were many othhers long gone by the time they got there.
This is another important information management point. You want the PCs to get some glimmer of a larger plot, but not enough to allow them to draw it to a close yet. You've got a lot of campaign still ahead. The architect doesn't know who was ultimately behind his kidnappers, but he knows this--they forced him to reveal the layout for three different locations: the royal palace, the royal treasury, and the winter palace in the south. The PCs can turn this information over to the authorities, but at this point, the mercenaries appear to be simple thieves and so extra guards are put on duty at these three locations. (The abductors asked about the other locations on their own initiative, seizing the opportunity. Lord Crenshaw's  plan only involves the royal palace. The other two serve as red herrings.)

PROGRESSION
Next, you lay our the course of things from here (probably around 2nd or 3rd level) to 8th or 9th level. You'll throw in some completely unrelated side adventures, because they're satisfying in that they have definitive conclusions and provide opportunities for variety. You don't need to plan these out ahead of time. They'll come in where you need them, and you can use aspects of your outlined plots to lead to them. Maybe a hook comes from a prisoner held by the orcs (or even the Order of the Legacy). Maybe something in the mercenary hideout where the architect was held gives a clue to a side adventure. It's easy to integrate otherwise unrelated hooks into the plot. You're not worried about that.
What's more difficult it to plan ahead of time how the PCs are going to get drawn back into either plot. You decide in your outline to use the Crenshaw plotline again. This time, however, it's the PCs who are on the defensive, as the mercenaries attempt to kill them since they might, at this point, konw too much. Assuming the PCs surive the encounter, they gain some clues that reveal the money and direction behind the mercenaries is a noble, but still not enough to suggest exactly who.
After that, the PCs come upon references to the Legacy while doing something entirely unrelated, in an old book or while talking to a sage, or something of that nature. With these references come clues about a magical key, hidden away and guarded, that opens a tower. That might not be enough, all by itself, to get them to go back, however. So you create another hook. The queen has heard about the PCs' encounter with the Order of the Legacy, and a little about the Legacy itself, although it is still a mystery. She's also received word that it is about to fall into evil hands. The queen commands them (with promises of payment) to find out what it is, and ensure its safety.
Now the PCs go off in search of the key, and retrieve it (an adventure in itself). They go to the fortress where the Legacy is, and find it deserted. More orcs have shown up (based on new visions sent by Vibanak) and killed the remainder of the order, but still could not in the tower.

REVELATIONS
FInally, it's time to reveal what the Legacy actually is. The players are likely tired of wondering about it and on the verge of being fed up with not knowing. The PCs wade through the (much tougher and perhaps demon-assisted) orcs and get inside the sealed tower, eventually obtaining the Legacy, which has taken the form of a large book that can speak. The Legacy has vast powers, but no experiences, so it has no idea how to use them. The queen does indeed reward them, and appoints them in charge of keeping the Legacy safe. This conneciton with the queen is important for things that will happen with the secondary plotline.
WIth the Legacy in their possession, the PCs have incentive to establish a permanent residence, as it's not all that easy to carry around. This can lead to all kinds of interesting situations, depending on where they seek to live--building a residence, rebuilding a ruin they explore, taking an established keep by force, or just raising the money to purchase a home.
At about the same time, you allow the PCs to learn the identity of the sinister noble who's backing the mercenaries they've tussled with, either by following up on more clues, or having those clues thrust upon them (if needed). Now, it would seem, there are no more mysteries for them to wonder about. But there are plenty of other shoes yet to drop.

TYING THINGS TOGETHER
At this point, the PCs could go to the queen with their information, but all they know is that Lord Crenshaw is a bad guy--not really what he's up to. They'll either want to investigate Crenshaw or confront him directly. Either way, they learn that he seems to have disappeared. If they're really good, they'll discover one important thing--Lord Crenshaw has been dabbling in demonology.
Vibanak is now interested in working with Lord Crenshaw to get what they both want. After things have "cooled down" and everyone's mostly forgotten about Crenshaw, Vibanak uses his demonic powers to possess the queen, and then through her orders the PCs to bring the Legacy to the palace. Lord Crenshaw and his men sneak in through a new, hidden passage they've tunneled from the sewer using the plans given them by the royal architect.

THE BIG FINALE (OR TWO)
The mercenaries attack. They have orders to threaten but not kill the princess, so that Crenshaw can swoop in and save her life at the last moment. Meanwhile, in the ensuring chaos of the attack, demonic servants of Vibanak try to snatch away the Legacy. If possible, they force the PCs into a situation where they must choose between saving the queen (not knowing that she's posessed) and saving the Legacy. The plan is that the possessed queen qill then immediately give her daughter's hand in marriage to Crenshaw--whether the princess wants to marry him or not (the rescue only exists to provide a plausible explanation for the queen's actions)--and soon thereafter end her own life.
But the PCs might discover the possession and try to put an end to it. They might see through Crenshaw's plan and stop him. Or both. And if the demons got the Legacy, then the PCs will have to go to the Abyss itself to rescue it--a fantastic climax to the campaign to say the least. Otherwise, you determine, the big fight in the palace will be the climax. EIther way, you can rearrange things to make them truly memorable.

RAILROADING VS. ANTICIPATING
It may seem like the outline you've thought up railroads the players into doing what you want them to do. This, however, does not have to be the case. Mostly, the outline just plans for the moments when you reveal more information or throw out new plot hooks. They don't have to do anything--the outline you've created merely presupposes what they are likely to do (which means you have to create your outline with your specific players in mind, hopefully havnig some idead what they are likely to do and not do). Just as no plan surives contact with the enemy, no outline is ever going to remain unchanged onve the campaign starts. That's why at this stage it's so vague. You may have to restructure things. Perhaps Vibanak has to send demonic agents to the PCs' home. Perhaps the Legacy itself takes the initiative and tells the PCs what it wants to do. Perhaps Lord Crenshaw has to use magic to charm the princess, or turn his attack on the palace into a literal coup and take power by force. If the PCs (or the players) throw you for a loop, you'll always have the time between sessions to readjust the outline.
And to further keep from railroading the players, there will be plenty of side adventures not mentioned in the outline that they can with undertake or choose to avoid. You need not plan these out well beforehand--introduce them as seems fitting, again using the time between sessions to plan, re-plan, and adjust. DUNGEON magazine is a great resource to have in this regard, as you can toss in DUNGEON adventures as needed, using only those whose hooks the PCs choose to take.
Making an outline like this is extremely helpful and allows you to forshadow coming events of importance and give things direction. Even just possessing a rough outline will come through in your DMing. The players might not know where things are going, but they'll be able to tell that it's going somewhere and not just floundering randomly. The outline does not, however, allow you to sit back and relax throughout the campaign because your work is all done ahead of time. Even when everything is going according to plan, a good DM is continually plotting and scheming (like Lord Crenshaw). A good outline allows you to plot and scheme regarding events of four or five playing sessions in advance, not scrambling for what to do in the very next session each week.