twists_and_turns-designing_the_campaign_around_the_characters_part_3
"Twists and Turns -- Designing the Campaign Around the Characters (part 3)"
Dungeoncraft - Mastering the Game
Dungeon June 2005

A CHARACTER-CENTRIC CAMPAIGN
There's nothing wrong with having a campaign where the characters don't matter. Now, that may sound cold and heartless, but it's true. You can design a campagin where the PCs might be a dwarf fighter, an elf wizard and three human rogues, but it would be essentially no different than if the PCs were a half-orc fighter, a human wizard, a human cleric, and a halfling rogue. The ecounters might go differently, but the plotlines you set up, the opponents you create, and the environments you design all remain the same. And that's fine.
However, you can also design a campaign fundamentally altered by who the PCs are, or even one that only works with very specific characters involved. For example, you could create a campaign centered around the drow as villains where the PCs are drow-hating elves or those of other races who have been personally harmed by the drow in the past. Or, the PCs might represent the fulfillment of some ancient prophecy. One PC might be the long-lost heir to the throne. The PCs could even all be the results of a magical experiment gone awry. The village threatened by the oncoming hobgobin army might be the very place one or more PC hails from. The PCs might all be wizards at a magical school at the heart of all the campaign's action.
The advantage to a character-centric campaign is that the players feel special, and frankly, it's fun to be special. The challenges they face are more immediate, and the dangers are heightened because they relate directly to the PCs. The characters aren't just outsiders seeking glory or gold, they're involved. If they fail, the consequences directly affect them. The campaign won't feel like every other run-of-the-mill game that the players have been in before--it will be its own, unique experience.
And while I refer to this as acharacter-centric <i>campaign</i>, the truth is that it's only some of the adventures that are centered around the characters, usually, and the adventures have different hooks involving different characters or different aspects of the same character. A wizard character might seek to enter a special magica organization, but in order to do so, the secret headquarters must be found and test must be passed. Later, another character in the same group learns that her adventurer father is missing and the PCs must track him down and rescue him from the trouble he's got himself into. Still later, the wizard character's old master contacts him to warn of a demon that secretly inhabits the staff he gave him when he was but an apprentice. After that, yet another character in the group falls in love but his impending nuptials might be ruined when an old foe shows up to enact revenge. Sprinkle in a few more straightforward adventures, and you've got a character-centric campaign.
The drawbacks to this approach, of course, are both serious and obvious. If one of the PCs is the secret heir to the throne, what happens if that PC dies? Or, taken a step further, with that PC being at the heart of the campaign's plotline, are the players ever going to really believe that he (or they) are ever in any real danger? Will their importance to the story take away any belief that they might fail? Special character are too important to lose, right?

CHARACTER CAMPAIGNS VERSUS CAMPAIGN CHARACTERS
To make a campaign based around the PCs, the DM doesn't have to put the PCs at the heart of the setting. You can have a character-based campaign without having a campaign based around the characters. In other words, the PCs' "specialness" doesn't have to mean that they are kings, or lords of prophecy, or the saviors of the world. If one of the PCs is the son of a gambler with unpaid debts so that moneylenders and criminals are after the character to pay off his father's debts, the character is "special" in that some of the adventures surround this fact, but he really isn't all that special in terms of the entire setting. While it's fun to have characters that are important to the entire world they live in (so-called "campaign characters"), not every story is about such people, and the chraacter-centric campaign could be designed around these smaller kinds of stories. Either way, the players will feel their characters are in the thick of the action, and that's the important thing.
As a side note, though, DMs should be aware that they can also make the PCs central figures in the campaign through events or actions, rather than heredity or destiny. For example, the DM might create a campaign in which the PCs have been entrusted with an ancient secret by a dying sage that leads them to undetake an important quest. Once the PCs have this secret, much of the campaign revolves directly around them--only they can go on the quest and only they posssess the secret knowledge. Before they learned the secret, however, there was nothing intrinsically special about the characters.

PLAYER GOALS
Past installments of this column have discussed the idea of a player-driven campaign. In such a campaign, the players drive at least some of the action by creating goals for themselves rather than having quests or missions given to them by some outside force. This method of running a campaign meshes nicely with the idea of centering the campaign aournd the players. In fact, you really can't have a player-driven campaign without centering everything on the PCs.
You don't have to let the players sit in the driver's seat to uutilize this idea, hoever, you can do it on a smaller scale.
Say one PC's goal is to own his own home. That's not enough to drive a campaign, but it is enough to wrap an adventure or two around. Earning the money needed to buy or build the home, discovering the home is haunted, defending the home from thieves--the possibilities are numerous.
The only trick here is to find out that the PCs' goals and desires are, so that as the DM you can give them the proper hooks to play off of. This can be as simple as just asking the players or a list of goals. Or, the goals might develop over the course of the game. After the PCs defend the forested vale against invading orcs and trolls, they decide they want to live there, setting temselves up as the kingdom's officially sanctioned (and hopefully supported) Defenders of the Vale.
Sometiems, player goals come out when a player designs his character's background. Sometimes, they are the very reason a PC is in the campaign. For example, a PC barbarian's background suggests that he has come to the civilized lands to track down the slavers that attacked his tribe and kidnapped some of his people. This is an interesting background, and it's also a potential adventure hook. Now the DM can design entire adventures around tracking down the slavers. rescuing slaves, and returning them to the tribe.




THE PLAYERS HAVE TO PLAY ALONG [sidebar]
For a character-centric campaign to really work, the players must realize that they need to give the DM material to work with. This isn't a chore, though--it's a freedom. When the players realize that they are free to have their characters have a past, to have interests beyond the next dungeon, to have relationships with NPCs other than those out to kill him, it opens up an infinite number of possibilities. Characters can fall in love. They can o into business. They can join organizations. They can get involved in the community--perhaps even in politics. These things are fodder for the character-centric campaign and they lead to well-rounded and interesting characters that go far beyond a set of stats and gear.
Players need to provide the DM with interesting backstories and possible NPCs related to what they have done, what they are doing, and what they plan in doing in the future. THey need to tell the DM their future goals and what their chracter would eventually like to strive for. They need to be willing to interact with NPCs and the world around them on a personal level. It's a responsibility, but it's also really fun and very rewarding.
